Adolescence is a developmental period marked by heightened vulnerability to experimentation with substances  and risk for psychopathology.1–4 During child and adolescent development, the brain undergoes significant structural and functional maturation, making it particularly sensitive to environmental influences. There is high comorbidity between psychosis and substance use, with hazardous substance use occuring at 4.6 times above the general population in patients with chronic schizophrenia,5 as well as some evidence for increased rates of substance use among adolescents displaying early, subthreshold psychotic symptoms.6 However, despite these associations, the link between substance use and psychosis and associated risk factors remain poorly understood. Given the age-dependent effects of substance use on the developing brain, increasingly permissive drug legislation, and the growing popularity of cannabis and e-cigarettes, identifying markers of risk for substance use and psychopathology during child and adolescent development is of great public health interest.7–9 

One of the critical gaps in current research lies in understanding the risk factors and pathways that lead to psychosis and substance use outcomes. If substance use and psychosis risk co-occur, what factors affect risk for developing psychosis spectrum symptoms absent of substance use, substance use absent of psychosis spectrum symptoms, or substance use in combination with psychosis? There is a need to elucidate how a combination of demographic, environmental, clinical, and neural factors collectively influence individual risk during development (Aim 1). Further, adolescence presents a window for characterizing and identifying early neurobiological profiles associated with  psychosis spectrum symptoms and substance use (Aim 2). 

Predicting risk prior to psychosis onset is an important clinical goal with high translational impact. Combined with longitudinal data, one relatively novel statistical approach, classification modeling, holds great promise for improving our prediction of negative health
outcomes before they manifest. Maximizing sensitivity in models that prospectively detect early risk factors is an important first step in aiding clinicians in delivering targeted, early interventions. Further, new analytic tools such as Neuromaps enable us to descriptively characterize neurobiological profiles at the group level. 

This study leverages data from the Adolescent Brain and Cognitive Development (ABCD) Study to address these critical knowledge gaps. Specifically, it aims to:  
1. Predict risk for substance use and psychosis spectrum outcomes in adolescence from risk factors in childhood via machine learning classifiers and multivariate neuroimaging approaches. 
2. Characterize neural, behavioral, and metabolic markers associated with substance use and psychosis spectrum outcomes in adolescence. 

By integrating advanced machine learning methods with a rich, longitudinal neuroimaging dataset incorporating both structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), this study seeks to deepen our understanding of the complex interplay between adolescent substance use, psychosis, and associated risk factors, ultimately informing predictive models of factors influencing psychosis and risk for substance abuse. 
